It was the third time we stopped by in this little town Cernobbio, which is rather unremarkable compared to the other more polished establishments around the shores of the Lago. And it is the fifth or sixth time we left Milan at around 11am, looking at a looming 7 hours drive back to Heidelberg ahead. We were both excited and sentimental when we again drove out of the rustic tunnel that led to the stunning panoramic view of Lake Como, since after the lunch, which is the sole motivation we could have powered through the stressful week, and once across the Alps, we will again be drowned in the relentless rain and the almost oppressive darkness of Central Europe. 


The hidden restaurant Materia is run by a small cohort of four. “Four heads, four passions, one dream” so goes their philosophy. This ardent devotion to simplicity explains the minimalist decor—-a plain mirror, a black-and-white splash-ink that gives the ambience a Scandinavian chill. Materia’s food is a sharp contrast with this distanced ambience, with the chef’s mastery of the wildest combination of ingredients and curiosity of a bizarre realm of flavors, which they love any nuances. 

Yet,Yet flavors are not easy to tame, nor to remember. The subtleties of flavors will mist swiftly post-consumption, leaving behind a scattering of words that struggle to encapsulate the intricate tapestry of taste, only a select few etched indelible impressions on memory. Materia's smoked risotto, however, claims its place asamong the culinary "Unforgattables." The dish is presented in a green porcelain stale, a classical Ginori porcelain. The risotto achieves a harmonious consistency, precisely poised between the mushy softness of porridge and the steadfast resilience that wards off impatience in the act of chewing. The foundation is infused with birch syrup. The dish is then finished with flakes of sea buckthorn powder and truffles on the top. I was deeply enchanted by the surprising yet delicate interplay of contradictions: a spoonful of creamy rice bathed in the aggressive, smoky, gluey vinegar, the elusive sweetness from the birch syrup lingers––a surprising clash where savory collides with sour. In this unassuming bowl of hearty risotto, the season itself seems encapsulated: pine needles, truffles, rice, and vinegar synchronize to summon the very essence of the earth. Yet, amid this terrestrial ode, the sour crisp of sea buckthorn imparts an ethereal quality, a whisper of the lake's gentle spirit and vitality.

I am not so much of a cake person. I will happily take a fruity sorbet, I certainly indulge in a refreshing sweet soup, and I much appreciate for a bit of tartness as a rejuvenating wrap up of a hearty feast, but rarely a cake, especially not a chocolate cake. And it must be the most improbable ideas to associate games with cakes, but a hare chocolate cake from Materia truly defies traditional expectations. Initial reservations about the dish still linger when I placed my order: the hare cream exceeds the framework of a traditional chocolate cake in its creaminess and rich body, yet if not balanced with other attributes, the creaminess can easily transition to an overpowering oiliness. It will indeed take a good amount of thinking and experiments from the chef to avoid disrupting the culinary narrative flow of the menu and overwhelm his diners. The audacious fusion of hare and chocolate, both contribute to substantial mouthfeel, requires a nuanced approach. The chef’s thorough understanding of ingredients and acute sensory perceptions plays the most pivotal role in this balancing design. And the success of this culinary endeavor promised an exploration of unprecedented flavor and texture—a promise affirmed with the initial scoop of the hare chocolate cake.

The slice of four-layers of glazing dark chocolate alternates with caramel hare cream. It was simply served with some drops of apricot jam. An intriguing butter quality lingers on the taste buds. A pinch of saltiness and an iron-rich essence from the red meat introduce an additional savory layer to the flavor profiles, tempering the chocolate’s inherent sweetness. The outstanding tartness in the apricot jam balances out the inevitable oiliness and rich body of game meat, together with the savory sweet cake orchestrating a sensational journey through a wildly lush, humid, and vivid rain forest, a celebration of dangerous, insubordinate, diverse yet interconnected forms of lives. 

We have been to Materia twice before, every time indulging ourselves with their full menu. The previous two sets are a better reflection of the chief’s Noma experiences, his Como roots, and dashing culinary style: the linguine was exceptional both times, the marrow bone dessert fantastic, the pigeon heart macaron simply a piece of miracle. The more extensive “Untitled” menu takes a significant departure from the past gastronomic designs, for us an entirely unchartered flavor territories: towards the conclusion, the delivery of the menu was rather on the heavy side, which makes sense, given the generous inclusion of wilds and games in the 13-courses comprehensive research of the goods Lake Como has to offer, a culinary Odyssey (the meal lasted for almost 3 hours) full of surprises—-after all, red meat isn’t something one usually expects in a dessert. 

At the point of writing, I was back in my apartment in Heidelberg, nestled in my study, taking a deliberate retreat from my work to shield myself from the capricious snow and drizzles outside. At these not-so-exciting moments, memories of Materia’s lunch surfaced, reminding me that there are many to be discovered, reinvented out of the seemingly most mundane facets of existence. A comforting warmth arises. 



If ever spending a day or two in Lake Como, be sure to make a stop in Cernobbio and prepare yourself for an umami explosion at Materia. 
